Proposal to add file similarity retriever to haystack (#5629)
deepset-ai/haystack: proposals/text/5629-file-similarity-retriever.md

- Title: Adding FileSimilarityRetriever to haystack
- Decision driver: @elundaeva
- Start Date: 2023-08-28
- Proposal PR: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/pull/5629
- Github Issue or Discussion: some links available in the "Detailed design" section below

# Summary

> The retriever takes a file ID as query, searches for all documents from that file in the doc store and then performs one query for these documents, finding similar files for each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The retriever takes a file ID as query, searches for all documents from that file in the doc store and then performs a query for each document to find similar documents for each. Then these search results for each document are aggregated to produce a list of similar files. 
```

> The retriever takes a file ID as query, searches for all documents from that file in the doc store and then performs a query for each document to find similar documents for each. Then these search results for each document are aggregated to produce a list of similar files.

Reviewer 2: file ID or any other aggregation key

# Basic example

The FileSimilarityRetriever would be instantiated as follows:

> ''' python

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
```

	  retriever = FileSimilarityRetriever(
	      document_store = ElasticSearchDocumentStore,
	      primary_retriever = EmbeddingRetriever, # defined separately, see full pipeline example below
          top_k=30,
	      file_aggregation_key = "file_id",
          max_num_queries = 50
	  )

> '''

Reviewer: Also change quotes `'''` to backticks "`"

And here is an example of how the node would work in the context of a full pipeline:

``` yaml

version: '1.19.0'
name: 'FileSim'

components:
  - name: DocumentStore
    type: DeepsetCloudDocumentStore
    params:
      similarity: cosine
      embedding_dim: 768
      return_embedding: false

  - name: EmbeddingRetriever
    type: EmbeddingRetriever
    params:
      document_store: DocumentStore
      embedding_model: sentence-transformers/all-mpnet-base-v2
      max_seq_len: 400
      batch_size: 32
      model_format: sentence_transformers
      top_k: 50
  - name: TextConverter # Converts files into documents
    type: TextConverter
  - name: FileSimilarityRetriever
    type: FileSimilarityRetriever
    params:
      document_store: DocumentStore

>       primary_retriever: EmbeddingRetriever

Reviewer 2: Note that I only used primary and secondary retriever because it wasn't possible to pass a list of retriever instances instead. Maybe it would be good to check again if this is now supported by pipelines. It would make the design more flexible

Author: I've discussed with Core and seems it hasn't changed yet & most likely won't in the near future. So, keeping primary & secondary retrievers as separate parameters seems like the way to go for now 👍

Author: That being said, @ZanSara mentioned that won't be an issue once Haystack 2.0 is out, so I can change it to list of retrievers at that point 🙂

      top_k: 30
      file_aggregation_key: file_id

>       max_num_queries: 50 # changed 2022-11-14

Reviewer 2: comment should be removed

pipelines:
  - name: query
    nodes:
      - name: FileSimilarityRetriever
        inputs: [Query]

  - name: indexing
    nodes:
      - name: TextConverter
        inputs: [File]

      - name: EmbeddingRetriever
        inputs: [TextConverter]

      - name: DocumentStore
        inputs: [EmbeddingRetriever]

```

# Motivation

> Initially this retriever was implemented by Mathis for a customer case to quickly retrieve documents similar to a given file. The reason we would like to add it to Haystack is because we see wider use for this node in future customer and community cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially this retriever was implemented by Mathis for a customer case to quickly retrieve similar files given a file as input. The reason we would like to add it to Haystack is because we see wider use for this node in future customer and community cases.
```

One example where this could be useful is in academic writing, if you have a large number of scientific sources (journals, books, conference proceedings) stored and you'd like to find all that are similar to a specific article or to what you've written so far (in the latter case, it can also be helpful for plagiarism detection). And as for industry use cases, report writing in any field can be facilitated by file similarity retrieval. It can also be very helpful for lawyers preparing a case as well as journalists doing research for their articles.

# Detailed design

You can see the code for this proposal here: https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/pull/5666/files.

As a general description, the FileSimilarityRetriever works by:

> 1. Getting all documents corresponding to the provided file ID from the document store. The documents can be obtained together with their embeddings, to save resources by avoiding re-calculating them at query time.

Reviewer: Great point! This means that no machine learning models are needed to run at query time to get these recommendations right?

Author: Yes, I think so

2. Retrieving similar docs to each document from the file, using one or two chosen retrieval methods.
3.  a) Returning the top-k retrieved similar documents, if only one retrieval method was used.
    b) Returning an aggregated list of similar documents retrieved by both retrievers, if two retrieval methods were chosen. The results are aggregated based on the reciprocal rank fusion score, though it is also possible to keep the original score (if one of the retrievers assigned the document a relevance score) in the metadata.
    Reciprocal rank fusion is calculated as 1 / (k + index)
    k is set to 61 in reciprocal rank fusion based on a University of Waterloo paper (co-authored with Google) called "Reciprocal Rank Fusion outperforms Condorcet and individual Rank Learning Methods" [https://plg.uwaterloo.ca/~gvcormac/cormacksigir09-rrf.pdf] where k=60 was suggested, and 1 was added as python lists are 0-based and the paper used 1-based ranking.

> 

Reviewer: I wonder if instead we should return a list of File names (or whatever is chosen as the `file_aggregation_key`) instead of a list of documents.

FileSimilarityRetriever has the following parameters:
    document_store: The document store that the retriever should retrieve from.
    file_aggregation_key: The meta data key that should be used to aggregate documents to the file level.
    primary_retriever (optional): First retriever (if applicable).
    secondary_retriever (optional): Second retriever (if applicable).
    keep_original_score (optional): Set this to store the original relevance score of the returned document in the document's meta field (the documents' scores get replaced in the FileSimilarityRetriever output with the reciprocal rank fusion score).

>     top_k: How many documents to return.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could make it so that users can decide if they want to return the top scoring document for each file or a list of file aggregation keys?

>     top_k: How many documents to return.

Reviewer: Yeah toggling this behavior sounds fine by me.

# Adoption strategy

This is not a breaking change and there does not seem to be any need for a migration script. Existing Haystack users can just start using this node on as-needed basis by itself, no need for a reader/PromptNode after the FileSimilarityRetriever.

# How we teach this

It could be good to have a short tutorial about how this node is used, as it's slightly different in the query input and in the outputs from other retriever nodes. Alternatively, a blog post could be written about it.

As for documentation needs, some info on how to use this retriever would be good to add to the Retrievers page (https://docs.haystack.deepset.ai/docs/retriever). If you need help writing the documentation and/or the blog post/tutorial, please do not hesitate to reach out to me.

# Unresolved questions

Not many unresolved questions, I'll just need to see if the retriever can be adopted so it inherits from the BaseRetriever and not BaseComponent. Plus I might need to add the "retrieve_batch" method as currently it only has "retrieve".

> Another open question is whether it would be a good idea to enable providing a JoinDocuments node in the parameters (after the primary_retriever and secondary_retriever), to make results aggregation more flexible. This would make it possible to (in the definition of JoinDocuments) choose the join_mode (concatenate/merge/reciprocal_rank_fusion) and in case "merge" is chosen, it would also be possible to set weights per retriever.

Reviewer 2: I think the problem with the JoinNode is that it doesn't provide aggregation based on a specific meta data key.

Author: Hmm, that's true... we can keep the current aggregation approach then.

> Alternatively, we could change how the FileSimilarityRetriever works and instead of primary_retriever + secondary_retriever + join_node provide it right away with a hybrid document search pipeline that includes all these elements, and just make FileSimilarityRetriever iteratively perform the document search for all docs pertaining to a file and output the top_k documents found. But this looping of doc search pipeline execution within a filesim pipeline may not be currently supported. Is this something that would be possible in Haystack 2.0?

Author: @sjrl Just to make sure we're on the same page (before I post the proposal for discussion), is this what you had in mind regarding the join node addition?

Reviewer: Yeah this sounds correct to me. I would change one thing ```within a filesim pipeline may not be currently supported``` to ```within a filesim pipeline is not a typical design pattern in Haystack v1 and we are unsure if it would be a good approach.```

Author: All very good suggestions, thank you! 💪 Implemented 💯

1. Getting all documents corresponding to the provided file ID from the document store. The documents can be obtained together with their embeddings, to save resources by avoiding re-calculating them at query time.
2. Retrieving similar docs to each document from the file, using one or two chosen retrieval methods.
3.  a) Returning the top-k retrieved similar documents, if only one retrieval method was used.
    b) Returning an aggregated list of similar documents retrieved by both retrievers, if two retrieval methods were chosen. The results are aggregated based on the reciprocal rank fusion score, though it is also possible to keep the original score (if one of the retrievers assigned the document a relevance score) in the metadata.
    Reciprocal rank fusion is calculated as 1 / (k + index)
    k is set to 61 in reciprocal rank fusion based on a University of Waterloo paper (co-authored with Google) called "Reciprocal Rank Fusion outperforms Condorcet and individual Rank Learning Methods" [https://plg.uwaterloo.ca/~gvcormac/cormacksigir09-rrf.pdf] where k=60 was suggested, and 1 was added as python lists are 0-based and the paper used 1-based ranking.

> 4. Returning the top-k similar files, based on an aggregated relevance score of all documents pertaining to the file. In the results the user sees the most relevant document from each file.

Reviewer 3: It isn't clear to me what top-k does. It seems like there are two top-k values that need to be set:
1. The number of documents to be returned in step 3
2. The number of files to be returned in step 4
They may need to be different if multiple documents from the same files. However, I don't know if it's realistic to guarantee a certain number of files because then we would need to set the first top-k to (number of splits in longest document) * (second top-k) which we would need to keep track of and which could be very big.

Reviewer 3: I just noticed that this was already discussed. However, I think the proposal should probably be more clear on this.

Author: I've modified the description to (hopefully) make the top-k clearer - please let me know if it can be improved further 👍

Reviewer 3: Thanks, that makes it clearer.

> 4. Returning the top-k similar files, based on an aggregated relevance score of all documents pertaining to the file. In the results the user sees the most relevant document from each file.

Reviewer 3: It isn't clear to me how the aggregation works. As far as I can see, aggregation occurs across two (three) axes:
1. Aggregation across documents from query file: I don't really understand how this is done. Do we just calculate the max or sum them? If we were to sum them, we could turn this from O(m*n) to O(m+n) due to distributivity of vector addition and dot product. (m is the number of documents per query and n the number of documents across which we search).
2. Aggregation across documents from same file found by similarity: In another comment, it's mentioned that this is max. I can see that this is probably the easiest approach because there is probably a different number of documents per file. However, it's also easy to imagine a case where this might fail. Take, for example, the research paper search: The related works section might mention an approach that is very similar to the query. However, you would be more interested in a paper where most documents are somewhat similar to your query because that would be the actual paper that is referred to in the related works section of the less related paper which would be returned just because the related works section is more concise and therefore only one document.
3. (There is also an aggregation step across multiple retrievers, but that seems clear to me.)

I am not saying that it's necessary to evaluate all possible aggregation approaches, but the proposal could perhaps explain which approaches are taken and why they are taken.

Reviewer 2: It's largely based on this: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.01614.pdf

With the thought that the benefit of VRRF doesn't justify the complexity.

Reviewer 2: Aggregation is done on both axes via reciprocal rank fusion.

Author: I think first we find the most relevant docs for each doc of the given file (with 1 or 2 retrievers), then calculate RRF for all retrieved documents, then sum up the RRFs of all documents pertaining to the same file to sort the final files by relevance, and return the top scoring document from each file in the final results. Seems the usage of RRF should mitigate cases where only one document of the file is highly relevant while the rest are not, since from that file only one document will be retrieved, while for a file that's consistently similar to query file across many of its documents, many documents will make it to the results and the score will go further up. 

But I'm not sure - @mathislucka could you please comment on the score aggregation method & why it was chosen?

Reviewer 3: Thanks, that makes a lot of sense. Perhaps, it would be useful to link the paper in the proposal.

Author: Good idea! Added 👍

> We can also provide the user a choice to have the values of the metadata key used for aggregation (e.g. file IDs) returned instead of the most relevant documents, e.g. via an additional optional param "output" set by the user to "top_document" or "file_aggregation_key", with "top_document" being default since it looks more similar to the output of all pipelines (as haystack pipelines usually return natural language responses).

Author: @sjrl @mathislucka Great suggestion about letting the user choose what they want the output to be - I've added a line about that in the description 👍

- document_store: The document store that the retriever should retrieve from.
- file_aggregation_key: The meta data key that should be used to aggregate documents to the file level.
- primary_retriever: First retriever.
- secondary_retriever (optional): Second retriever (if applicable).
- keep_original_score (optional): Set this to store the original relevance score of the returned document in the document's meta field (the documents' scores get replaced in the FileSimilarityRetriever output with the reciprocal rank fusion score).
- top_k: How many documents to return.
- max_query_len: How many characters can be in a query document. The documents exceeding this limit will be cut off. This was added because in some cases BM25Retriever threw an error if the query exceeded the `max_clause_count` search setting (https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/7.17/search-settings.html)
- max_num_queries (optional): The maximum number of queries that should be run for a single file. If the number of query documents exceeds this limit, the query documents will be split into n parts so that n < max_num_queries and every nth document will be kept.

> - use_existing_embeddings: Whether to re-use the existing embeddings from the index. To optimize speed for the file similarity retrieval you should set this parameter to `True`. This way the FileSimilarityRetriever can run on the CPU.

Reviewer 3: Is there any reason you would want to set this to `False`? You would probably also not recompute the document embeddings and only the query embeddings so it would also not allow changing embedding models

Author: I've ran it now with different retrieval options and with this param set to true & false, and indeed didn't find much reason to use "false" there, the param could be removed and the retriever could always re-use embeddings where possible I think. @mathislucka do you have an opinion on this?

Reviewer 2: You might want to use a different embedding model or play with multiple ones quickly. The initial retrieval only uses the filter retriever so it's pretty independent which embedding model you use.

  - name: FileSimilarityRetriever
    type: FileSimilarityRetriever
    params:
      document_store: DocumentStore
      primary_retriever: EmbeddingRetriever
      top_k: 30
      file_aggregation_key: file_id
      max_num_queries: 50

pipelines:
  - name: query
    nodes:
      - name: FileSimilarityRetriever
        inputs: [Query]

  - name: indexing
    nodes:
      - name: TextConverter
        inputs: [File]

      - name: EmbeddingRetriever
        inputs: [TextConverter]

      - name: DocumentStore
        inputs: [EmbeddingRetriever]

```

# Basic example - updated

When implemented as two sub-components (see the section **Detailed design - updated** below), this retriever would be instantiated as follows:

``` python

	  DocumentFetcher = DocumentFetcher(
	      document_store = ElasticSearchDocumentStore,
	      file_aggregation_key = "file_id",
        max_num_docs = 50
	  )

    >>> then one or two retrievers here >>>

    DocumentAggregator = DocumentAggregator(
        top_k = 5,
        file_aggregation_key = "file_id",
        output = "top_document", # This new param is explained in Detailed design section below
        keep_original_score = True
    )

> 

Reviewer: I'm a little confused by the full pipeline flow here. Could you provide code examples for the Retriever(s) and how they interact with the `DocumentAggregator`? Will these components be passed to a wrapper node like `FileSimilarityRetriever`?

Author: I think how we package it is still an open question (related to [this comment](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/pull/5629#issuecomment-1705258037)) - whether it makes sense to make a wrapper node already now or if things change drastically with Haystack 2.0 it could be done later to avoid double work 🤔

```

> It would also be possible to skip the DocumentFetcher and just add the DocumentAggregator on top of your retriever(s) to receive e.g. file names (if file_aggregation_key is set to "name" and output is set to "file_aggregation_key") as output instead of documents directly from the retriever.

Reviewer: I'm not entirely sure how you mean we could skip the DocumentFetcher here. I think with the basic example more flushed out it would be easier to see when this node could be skipped.

Author: Yes, I will add the full pipeline example.

In the meantime, to clarify a bit, it would look like:

"Any regular query" 
>>>
retrieval for that query, as usual in any doc retrieval pipeline (not batch retrieval in this case bc it's not file similarity)
>>>
DocumentAggregator that will collect scores of retrieved documents up to file level & return file names/IDs or the top most relevant document from each file

- DocumentAggregator placed after the retriever(s) that aggregates the document list(s) using RRF into a single ranked list of files, which are put together based on file_ids of retrieved docs.

These sub-components will have the following params (for full explanation see Detailed design section above):
- DocumentFetcher
  - document_store
  - file_aggregation_key
  - max_num_docs: optional, in the original version it was called max_num_queries
  Note: When researching how to change the params from the original implementation I found out there is no longer need for max_query_len that was required in the original FileSimilarityRetriever. It was implemented to not overshoot the max_clause_count limit in ElasticSearch settings but this got deprecated as of vs 8.0.0 according to their documentation - https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/search-settings.html

- DocumentAggregator
  - documents: can be a list or a list of list of docs
  - file_aggregation_key: default would be "file_id", but can be changed to e.g. "name"

>   - output: default "top_document", but can also be "file_aggregation_key"

Reviewer: Hmm, given the types of output that we plan on supporting I think we should find a different name than DocumentAggregator. It feels like a too general of a name that a user in isolation might want to use for other purposes. And given it's name I would expect the output to be a List of List of Documents grouped together based on the `file_aggregation_key`. 

Actually maybe we can keep the name, but I think we should also support the List of List of Documents output as well.

Author: Ah, here "output" refers to the parameter named "output" which we've [discussed earlier](https://github.com/deepset-ai/haystack/pull/5629/files#diff-5c6cac19742c9d58b46f9d0debaf53f941d926db1ef5e5cea0e638222619f4efR125) (let me know if it's confusing, can rename if needed) rather than the format of the output itself.

  - keep_original_score

>   - top_k = 5

Author: @sjrl @MichelBartels I've updated the Detailed design section & the Basic example sections above - please take a look and let me know if sth can be improved 👍 

Also, for the implementation, I'm thinking what these sub-components should inherit from - one option could be DocumentFetcher based on BaseRetriever (bc in practice it will work similarly to FilterRetriever for example) and DocumentAggregator can be based on BaseRanker since it sort of ranks the retrieved documents by assessing full file similarity but not sure... WDYT?

Reviewer: > one option could be DocumentFetcher based on BaseRetriever

Yeah, that makes sense to me. If it is going to basically be the FilterRetriever I do wonder if we should just use that node instead of creating a new one. What differences would there be between the FilterRetriever and the DocumentFetcher?

Author: > > one option could be DocumentFetcher based on BaseRetriever
> 
> Yeah, that makes sense to me. If it is going to basically be the FilterRetriever I do wonder if we should just use that node instead of creating a new one. What differences would there be between the FilterRetriever and the DocumentFetcher?

One small difference would be in how the metadata for filtering is provided - in the "filters" of the query (in FilterRetriever) or the meta key for aggregation is given as a param to DocumentFetcher and the value is received from the query itself. 
But this input part isn't as important as the output - DocumentFetcher needs to return a list of strings of fetched documents' contents (while FilterRetriever outputs haystack document objects), which can then be provided to the next retriever(s) as "queries" for batch retrieval at the next stage. Though this can be solved by adding an "output" param for FilterRetriever that makes it possible to get a list of strings instead of whole documents returned, what do you think @sjrl ?

Reviewer 3: @elundaeva Sorry, I could only take a look today because I was on PTO last week. I would agree with Sebastian that it would be nicer if there wasn't a need for a separate `DocumentFetcher` node. However, I can see that it would have to be ugly either way because of the output type.

Have you also thought about batch file retrieval? It was originally supported by your draft PR, but I can't see how it's possible the way it's described in the current proposal. I also didn't consider batching when I suggested to split the components. I would guess if we were to enable batching somehow, it would be even harder to use the `FilterRetriever` because we would need to flatten the result at some point.
